README.md, before:

> ⚠️ **Note**: This README and project structure were generated with the help of a large language model (LLM). Please review before publishing or deploying.

[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/utf8convert.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/utf8convert/)

# utf8convert

A command-line utility to recursively convert source files to UTF-8 encoding.

Supports:
- `.cpp`, `.h`, `.hpp` files by default
- Any custom extensions via `--extensions`
- Logging and summary reports (JSON and terminal)
- Dry-run mode
- Default and user-defined subdirectory exclusions

## 📦 GitHub

Project repository: [https://github.com/yhbyhb/utf8convert](https://github.com/yhbyhb/utf8convert)

---

## 🚀 Installation

You can install the package locally after downloading or cloning the repo:

```bash
pip install .
```

This will install the executable command: `utf8convert`

---

## 💻 Usage

```bash
utf8convert [DIRECTORY] [OPTIONS]
```

### Options:

- `--dry-run`  
  Preview files to convert without making changes.

- `--extensions [.ext1 .ext2 ...]`  
  List of file extensions to process (default: `.cpp .h .hpp`).

- `--exclude-dirs [dir1 dir2 ...]`  
  Relative paths of subdirectories to skip.  
  Defaults: `.git`, `.vs`, `vcpkg_installed`, and any dot-prefixed folders.

- `--json-output PATH`  
  Write a summary report as JSON to the specified path.

---

## 📌 Examples

### 🔍 Dry-run all C++ headers and sources
```bash
utf8convert ./src --dry-run
```

### 🛠 Convert files with `.c` and `.cc` extensions too
```bash
utf8convert ./src --extensions .cpp .h .hpp .c .cc
```

### 🧾 Generate a JSON report
```bash
utf8convert ./mycode --json-output utf8_summary.json
```

### 🚫 Skip specific folders
```bash
utf8convert ./codebase --exclude-dirs build third_party .cache
```

---

## 🧪 Test Locally

```bash
hatch run python -m utf8convert.cli ./your/code --dry-run
```

Let me know if you want to contribute or need help automating PyPI publishing.

Commit message:

docs: update README and CLI for new features
Enhance README with detailed options and summary.
Update CLI to support skipping ASCII files and log
timestamps in filenames. Improve error handling.

README.md, after:

> ⚠️ **Note**: This README and project structure were generated with the help of a large language model (LLM). Please review before publishing or deploying.

[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/utf8convert.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/utf8convert/)

# utf8convert

A command-line utility to recursively convert source files to UTF-8 encoding.

Supports:
- `.cpp`, `.h`, `.hpp` files by default  
- Any custom extensions via `--extensions`  
- Logging with timestamped filenames  
- Dry-run mode  
- Skip ASCII files (optional)  
- JSON summary output (optional)  
- Separate counts for intentionally skipped files and error cases  
- Default and user-defined subdirectory exclusions  

## 📦 GitHub

Project repository: [https://github.com/yhbyhb/utf8convert](https://github.com/yhbyhb/utf8convert)

---

## 🚀 Installation

You can install the package locally after downloading or cloning the repo:

```bash
pip install .
```

This will install the executable command: `utf8convert`

---

## 💻 Usage

```bash
utf8convert [DIRECTORY] [OPTIONS]
```

### Options:

- `--dry-run`  
  Preview files to convert without modifying anything.

- `--extensions [.ext1 .ext2 ...]`  
  List of file extensions to process (default: `.cpp .h .hpp`).

- `--exclude-dirs [dir1 dir2 ...]`  
  Relative paths of subdirectories to skip.  
  Defaults: `.git`, `.vs`, `vcpkg_installed`, and any dot-prefixed folders.

- `--skip-ascii`  
  Skip files detected with ASCII encoding (they're usually already compatible with UTF-8).

- `--json-output PATH`  
  Write a summary report as JSON to the specified path (not printed in logs).

---

## 📊 Summary Breakdown

The summary will show:
- Total scanned
- Already UTF-8
- Converted or would-convert
- Skipped (intentionally ignored, like ASCII)
- Errors (files that failed to decode/convert)

---

## 📌 Examples

### 🔍 Dry-run all C++ headers and sources
```bash
utf8convert ./src --dry-run
```

### 🛠 Convert files with `.c` and `.cc` extensions too
```bash
utf8convert ./src --extensions .cpp .h .hpp .c .cc
```

### 🧾 Generate a JSON report
```bash
utf8convert ./mycode --json-output utf8_summary.json
```

### 🚫 Skip specific folders
```bash
utf8convert ./codebase --exclude-dirs build third_party .cache
```

### ⚙️ Skip ASCII-encoded files
```bash
utf8convert ./legacy --skip-ascii
```

---

## 🧪 Test Locally

```bash
hatch run python -m utf8convert.cli ./your/code --dry-run
```

> ⚠️ **Note**: This README and project structure were generated with the help of a large language model (LLM). Please review before publishing or deploying.
